From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams. This is The Daily. [music]
When Jeff Bezos bought The Washington
Post more than a decade ago,
journalists inside and [music] outside
of the newsroom were cautiously
optimistic. Maybe he could revitalize
one of America's [music]
most storied news organizations. Brutal
blow to one of journalism's most
legendary brands, The Washington Post is
laying off [music] 1/3 of its staff
across all departments. Those hopes,
though, were dashed on Wednesday
when the paper laid off more [music]
than a third of its newsroom, affecting
nearly every section of the paper. The
[music] newspaper's books department
will close. Its Post Reports podcast
suspended.
>> sports department and most of its
overseas journalists. Today,
I talked to my colleague Eric Wemple
>> [music]
>> about what went wrong and what comes
next.
>> [music]
>> It's Thursday, February 5th.
Eric Wemple, welcome to The Daily.
Thank you. Thanks for having me. A lot
of people listening to our show today
probably have some kind of awareness
that people have been talking in really
apocalyptic terms about the state of
affairs at The Washington Post.
And specifically, the layoffs that
happened on Wednesday, which were
described by many people as frankly a
bloodbath.
And you, Eric, you are not only a media
reporter at The New York Times, but you
also were a media columnist at The
Washington Post. And this is why we
wanted to talk to you today because of
this unique vantage point that you have.
So, just to start, tell us what we know
about these cuts.
So,
this is an extremely grim outcome at The
Washington Post, a dark day, as many
people have been saying. We knew the
layoffs were coming, but they hit and
they hit with a tremendous amount of
force. And that analysis doesn't need to
extend that much
further than just saying that 300 people
who practice journalism for the benefit
of American civic life have lost their
jobs, maybe lost their careers, and
their livelihood at least for some time.
So, it doesn't really have to go beyond
that analysis. But, there is another
dimension to it, which is that this is
the Washington Post. And the Washington
Post right now is playing an enormously
important role in covering the
administration
for whom no headcount is really
sufficient.
So, that's what I would say about the
enormity of these events.
What do we know at this point at about
3:50 in the afternoon on Wednesday about
who was laid off?
Well, we know that the cuts took about
300 positions out of the newsroom.
And this was a newsroom that was at
about 800 in terms of its headcount. It
had crested up above 1,100 several years
ago, I think, and maybe in 2021, around
then.
And since then, it has been an exercise
in retrenchment. The layoffs landed
disproportionately on the metro desk,
the sports desk, and the international
coverage. Those are three areas that had
been rumored to be hit in recent weeks,
recent months, and indeed, that's what
happened. It feels like there are many
different things happening at once at
the Washington Post. You've got a tough
business, you've got a billionaire
owner, you've got an entire industry
struggling to figure out how to make it
in the age of the internet and social
media. So, which of these narratives
helps explain why a third of the
newsroom was laid off on Wednesday? The
question of what's happened to the post
is a little bit layered. Number one, the
Washington Post is a legacy regional
newspaper. And as a legacy regional
newspaper,
it has business model problems, very
clear ones that relate to the drying up
of revenue streams, and that's across
the industry.
Add on to that that Jeff Bezos, in the
past couple of years, has made some of
the steps that have led to
the desertion of subscribers and
business model problems for the
Washington Post
that really don't come with the standard
issue crisis that we've seen over the
past few decades. So,
that's how I'd put it, and I think that
that's one of the reasons why this is
such a big story.
I want to rewind a little bit and go
back to 2013, the year that Jeff Bezos
purchased the Post. And at the time,
people, both inside and I think outside
journalism, were extremely optimistic
that this guy was going to basically
ride in on a white horse and infuse the
place with cash and help it realize its
ambitions. So,
bring us back to that moment and tell us
kind of how things evolved from there.
So, when Jeff Bezos bought the
Washington Post, he was buying
essentially the same sort of paper that
we had seen fail in a lot of markets in
the United States, which is to say, a
struggling paper, a paper that had lost
staff, a paper that had lost a little
bit of vigor, and a paper that had lost
a fair bit of morale.
I mean, it was still producing very good
journalism, but it was definitely not at
like the top of its game. It was a
newspaper in need of investment,
especially since
the demands of the time were to figure
out new ways of putting reporting and
content online, which was, frankly, a
very expensive thing to do. Right.
So, Jeff Bezos buys the Washington Post
for $250 million,
basically in the summer/fall of 2013 and
Bezos had this idea that this was a a
lofty a goal certainly a worthwhile
pursuit to turn this sort of distressed
property with a lot of social value, a
lot of civic value, turn it around, make
it profitable.
>> The newspaper industry needs new
approaches and you know, Jeff Bezos may
be the guy to to do that. We hope so at
the Washington Post. And there were a
lot of eager people who were really
happy and excited to be working with him
and I think that that was a powerful
combination for a new owner.
>> [music]
>> I remember
reading a quote from Jeff Bezos at some
point that said something to the effect
of
when he was old one of the things he'd
be proudest of as part of his legacy was
the Washington Post and and helping to
turn that place around. And I remember
reading that and I remember the sense of
optimism that you are describing. But I
also remember Eric that there were some
concerns about editorial independence,
concerns about what does it mean for a
person that rich, that influential, who
has that many different business
interests to come in and take control of
a newspaper. There were absolutely
concerns about editorial independence
and I mean anytime you have a news
organization owned by a businessman of
such proportions, you're going to have
really really legitimate conflict of
interest concerns. But Bezos from the
very beginning
made it clear to news leaders of the
Washington Post that he would not
interfere in the coverage and
essentially said with respect to Amazon
and other interests of his, other
companies and so on and so forth,
whatever he would do, have at it. Cover
it the way you would any other company.
He said all the right things to a group
of journalists.
That's right. So what did he you next?
So next after buying the place, he
invested in the place. He invested in
the politics coverage. He invested in
the international coverage. He invested
in the technology. The Post website was
sort of creaky. It would take a long
time to load. So the Washington Post
became more of a news technology company
and less of this uh sort of old foggy
sort of read out where, you know, the
technology didn't work too well and it
was just let's see how many how many
pop-up ads do I have to fight off before
I get my content and so on and so forth.
So Bezos really he brought the newspaper
ahead leaps and bounds with those
investments. He made it user-friendly.
He made it much more user-friendly. Am I
making this up, Eric? Cuz I feel like I
remember around the time you're
describing suddenly seeing a lot more
articles that seemed like general
interest on social media. I would see
things pop up on Instagram and things
that seemed like very user-friendly,
very general interest. I remember having
the impression that they They seemed to
have like really be broadening their
reach in a like a technologically savvy
way.
Yes, I mean under Bezos the Post
invested more in its audience teams and
how to reach people. You know, the the
cliche that now is you need to reach
your audience where it lies or where
where it sits or where it is. All that
sort of lingo. That was reality at the
Post and it was much needed. And what
about Bezos's promise of staying out of
the news coverage? Well, I mean there
were many indications that he was indeed
staying out of the coverage as he had
promised to. The The Washington Post did
tremendous coverage of Amazon. It had
its own reporter on the company and a
lot of people were were looking for
signs that conflict of interest was
coming to roost at the Washington Post
and they didn't come up with much.
And not only did they, you know, seem
independent, but they were really,
really knocking it out of the park.
During this period the Post was doing an
extraordinary amount of excellent
journalism before Donald Trump's
election, after it, throughout that
term, the post was investigating him as
a candidate, as a president, along with
other major outlets in a way that I
believe was almost unprecedented in
American politics. They were delivering
scoops about his philanthropic
organizations, about his business
operations, and then into his
administration first year. And if you
want to know how badly that offended Mr.
Trump, you can just look at the lawsuit
that he filed against the Pulitzer board
a few years back.
>> Right. And so, this was an era of
tremendous, tremendous journalistic
effort and output.
>> They were breaking things that were
influencing the news.
>> Yes, absolutely. And during those years,
too, famously, the Washington Post came
up with a new motto, democracy dies in
darkness.
>> I remember. I think those years
represented
Bezos's promise fulfilled, an era of
tremendous success.
So, during this period of what sounds
like a reinvigorated newsroom,
how was it doing on the business side?
Was it making money? Was there a
strategy?
Yes, I mean, part of the strategy, of
course, was to ride the Trump bump.
Let's be honest about that. But they did
a lot of things to improve the product.
They were bringing on more subscribers
month after month. And through those
initial Trump years, the post was
allegedly profitable. But then it fell
off a cliff sort of in the beginning of
the Biden administration, '21, '22, when
digital advertising sort of dried up and
audience dried up. It was not as
interesting a time from the viewpoint of
a news consumer. There weren't major
stories coming out of the White House
hour after hour on a Saturday morning.
So, that was less news.
>> Mhm. And less crisis and fewer eyeballs,
fewer clicks. That had a big impact on
the Post's business, and there was also
a slump in digital advertising to boot.
So,
what you have then is that the
Washington Post started losing a lot of
money year after year, up to like $100
million. And
and
the eerie sort of feeling you got
looking at this is that those systemic
problems with the newspaper relating to
digital advertising, subscribers, those
problems
continue to haunt the Washington Post
ledger. Right. What you're saying is
essentially that the bump that the
Washington Post got in the years after
Trump was elected was not a response to
a new strategy, of a new business model.
It was a response to Trump. And so,
therefore, the Trump bump, this enormous
influx of readers right after the
election in 2016, kind of papered over
an intractable problem that was much
more intractable than perhaps anybody
had anticipated. Yes, indeed. That is
essentially
what we've learned kind of the hard way.
That the Post emerged from these years
of profitability, and then this one a
little bit sideways, that one a little
bit sideways. The audience wasn't fully
there, which means that the business
model isn't really robust. It can't
handle anything less than optimal
circumstances.
So, the Washington Post's business model
problems were such that even if you had
a management team that was making
reasonably smart and logical decisions,
the paper would still be struggling.
But, starting in 2024,
Jeff Bezos took a number of steps that
turned a problem into a genuine crisis.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
So, Eric, before the break, you
mentioned that the post in 2024 hit the
state of crisis. I think I know what
you're talking about, but tell us what
happened.
Yeah, so what happened in 2024 was
really significant.
The election proceeded with respect to
our coverage just as it always had.
>> [snorts]
>> The news side was doing its articles,
the editorial side was doing its
editorials and its op-eds, and things
were bumping along just fine. [music]
Now, as usually happened sometime in
late summer, early fall, the Washington
Post editorial board would begin
drafting and publish an endorsement of
one of the candidates in the
presidential race. Mhm. And this was
[music] something that readers had come
to expect, but as we inched closer and
closer to the election,
there was no editorial coming forth from
The Washington Post. Nothing was
published. Nothing was published, even
though people on the editorial board
were working on one and indeed had
mustered a draft endorsement in favor of
Democratic candidate Kamala Harris.
>> [snorts]
>> But, 11 days before the election,
Will Lewis, the publisher, announced
that there would be a new policy, and
that policy was to not publish
endorsements at all in this race and in
future races. It was articulated as a
policy shift and not as some sort of
political decision. Yeah, to explain the
reaction to that a little bit. It was
epic. People went berserk on the
Washington Post. You mean people were
writing in expressing their displeasure?
Our digital messaging platforms were a
flame.
They were very busy
and people answered immediately with
their money and they they canceled their
subscriptions.
NPR reported that there were in excess
of 250,000 cancellations of
subscriptions against a subscriber base
that was about 2.5 million at the time.
>> [music]
>> And Eric, why did people have that kind
of reaction given the fact that an owner
of a newspaper traditionally has the
right to influence the editorial page?
Yes, that's traditionally the
prerogative of owners and it's been
cemented for decades in American
newspapering, but what was particularly
problematic here
was not necessarily that Bezos had
instituted a new policy per se.
The issue was when it happened and what
had preceded it.
When it happened was 11 days before the
election and what preceded it was that
the Washington Post had a draft
endorsement for Kamala Harris in the
hopper ready to go. So, many people just
did the shorthand and say
Jeff Bezos killed the Kamala Harris
editorial. Now, the Washington Post's
statement was written to kind of prevent
that impression from taking hold, but it
wasn't very effective in doing that.
Mhm. And a not insignificant portion of
subscribers canceled, it seemed, because
of the decision to pull the endorsement.
There was no uncertainty about the cause
and effect here. None.
This drop happened because of this
decision and people at the Post were
livid about it and they were also
insistent
we should not be held liable for this
particular loss.
This [snorts] one's on management. They
should take the consequences of this
awful decision and not foist it on us
via cutbacks, layoffs, buyouts,
whatever. I remember this moment as
really the first clearest example of
something happening that people had
worried would happen when Bezos bought
the paper, which is that he would make a
decision that at least seemed like it
was caving to power. In this case,
giving what seemed like a gift to then
candidate Trump. Right. Well, you have a
lot of company in reaching that
conclusion is all I would say there. And
of course, that wasn't the end of it.
Just months later in February of 2025
Bezos just out of nowhere declared a
pivot in the Washington Post opinion
section's ideological outlook towards
personal liberties and free markets. And
that came out of the blue and again,
people reached the conclusion that this
was
a way of pivoting the opinion offerings
in favor of Donald Trump and the GOP.
Mhm. And then
I would say that there was a a dismay
that deepened over the course of several
months. I think that there started to be
a growing dissatisfaction with
leadership and a number of people took a
buyout to leave. Other people just chose
to leave. Including you, right?
Including me. That was my wife who
slapped me and said, "Wake up, Bucko."
Pretty much. Because I was sort of in a
state of denial about where everything
was headed. Mhm. Yeah, I think a lot of
us had that same
sort of feeling that we have been at
this institution for so long. It had
been so steady. It had been so reliable
that we could not believe that the
ground was shifting underneath our feet.
But there is and was a sentiment there
that things were just not very well
managed and very well thought through.
And that had never been the case before.
And that was I think the factor that
drove a lot of departures and drove a
lot of dissatisfaction.
It feels worth noting that none of what
we are talking about is happening in a
vacuum. The layoffs in particular that
have happened this week
Jeff Bezos just paid $75 million to a
company controlled by Melania Trump, the
first lady, for a documentary.
It's an exorbitant amount of money. It's
caused a lot of people to say that this
is nothing short of a transparent
attempt to cozy up to the
administration. Amazon is also one of
the top donors to the East Wing Ballroom
project the president has pursued.
And all of this is happening at a time
of unprecedented attacks on the press,
including at the Washington Post where a
journalist recently had her home
searched by the FBI. And so
I think a lot of people are probably
listening to this and have heard all of
this context and and are thinking about
all of the other things going on right
now in the world and in the world of
journalism and they're wondering, do
these cuts that we are talking about fit
into that backdrop in any way?
I am going to say
if you are going to cut a newsroom to
please Donald Trump in any way, I think
that those cuts would have been
different. In other words, they would
have
gone first after the investigative
capacity, the politics desk, the
national security desk of the Washington
Post. Those desks have done the greatest
damage over the years to President
Trump. Mhm. And the desks that you just
outlined, to be clear, those are
remaining intact. Well, those are
remaining more intact than the ones that
they targeted. Management has said that
the cuts affected pretty much all areas
of the newsroom, but the most directly
affected, the most proportionately deep
cuts fell on the metro, sports, and the
international staffs. So,
I don't think that that particular read
is operative here.
>> Mhm. The broader critique at play, I
think, is just that Bezos is gutting the
newsroom that he wants propped up and
that he wants invested in it and
that he expanded.
So, you we're basically seeing a
clawback of the investment that he put
into the newsroom.
It's basically like a boomerang.
So, that is kind of a cataclysm at the
Washington Post. That is a major, major
media story.
Why double down on the desks that you
mentioned, national security, politics,
investigations? Why are those desks the
ones that he and the rest of the
leadership are banking on?
Well, the explanation is that they have
found through looking at the data,
through looking at the analytics, the
areas that readers want, and they've
de-emphasized the ones that readers
don't want. Mhm. We don't have all their
analytics.
But, that's the rationale. That they
looked at the analytics, they decided
that this was the way to go, and that
this was the route to saving the
institution. Saving by shrinking the
institution, though.
>> Yes.
I can understand why that might make
sense to double down on what you believe
to be your core
product, but I want to read you
something that Jeff Bezos said when he
bought the paper.
I don't think you can keep shrinking the
business. You can be profitable and
shrinking, and that's a survival
strategy, but it ultimately leads to
irrelevance, at best. And at worst, it
leads to extinction.
So, how does that square, if it squares
at all, with the idea of doubling down
on just those few core areas? Well, I do
think that there is some logic there.
And that is that the Post has had a
tremendous run in these areas. The
problem is that they are cutting all
kinds of stuff
that people have enjoyed in the past.
And whenever a newspaper cuts,
there is a desertion.
And that desertion basically lowers
their revenue. It cuts into their
revenue because subscribers leave,
digital advertisers don't see as much
content they want to be adjacent to, and
so you get into sort of a spiral, which
people in the industry call a death
spiral, where you cut the product,
people desert the paper, revenues go
down, you cut more,
people desert, you cut more. And and and
it's a self-reinforcing cycle, and it's
misery. And there is no guarantee
whatsoever that the Post is not
descending into one of those spirals.
Because there is an open question as to
whether doubling down on these areas is
going to float the business model. There
is just no guarantee that it will.
I want to read you one more thing, Eric,
and this is a quote from Marty Baron's
statement on Wednesday. Marty Baron,
former executive editor of the
Washington Post. And his statement says,
"The Washington Post's ambitions will be
sharply diminished. Its talented and
brave staff will be further depleted,
and the public will be denied the
ground-level fact-based reporting in our
communities and around the world that is
needed more than ever." Looking at all
the cuts that you've outlined, looking
at the reaction from people both inside
and outside the Post talking about this
in, as I mentioned, apocalyptic terms,
what do you think
we can say about the Post's ability to
do the kind of journalism we have come
to expect and rely on from this paper?
Well, I would say we should never sell
short
the abilities of the journalists that
are there.
When a story emerges, they will get on
it. And they will continue
investigating, they will continue
breaking news, they will continue
kicking ass in journalism. So, people
[music] will continue I will continue to
subscribe to the Washington Post as I
have for decades. Nothing will make me
ever stop my subscription to the
Washington Post. I get it in print. I
read it every day. I've read it through
this tumult, too.
Every day, I find plenty to read in the
Washington Post. It will not stop
producing really good journalism.
>> [music]
>> What will happen is we will never see
the stuff that they just don't have the
manpower to produce. So, this becomes
something that is utterly ineffable,
utterly invisible, and utterly
impossible to quantify.
That there will be things going on in
the world that the Washington Post does
not have the resources or the eyes to
see through.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Eric Wemple, thank you so much for
joining us. Well, thank you for having
me.
We'll be right [music] back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
We currently have an unprecedented
number of counties communicating with us
now
>> [music]
>> and allowing ICE to take custody of
illegal aliens before they hit the
streets.
Unprecedented
cooperation.
>> [music]
>> On Wednesday, the President's orders are
Tom Homan said the government would
immediately withdraw 700 officers from
Minneapolis
>> [music]
>> after local officials agreed to increase
their cooperation with federal
immigration agents.
The cooperation Homan said involves
local officials allowing ICE agents
[music] to take custody of undocumented
immigrants before they are released from
jail. More officers taking custody of
criminal aliens directly from the jails
means less officers on the street
doing criminal operations.
And
the Supreme Court has cleared the way
for [music] California to use a new
congressional map explicitly designed to
help Democrats in this fall's midterm
elections.
The justices rejected [music]
an emergency request by the California
Republican Party to block the map.
Democrats [music] redrew the state's
congressional districts last year to
counter a similar effort undertaken by
Republicans [music] at President Trump's
behest in states like Texas.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Carlos Prieto, Shannon Lynn, and Eric
Krupke. It was edited by Devon Taylor
and Lisa Balin. Contains music by Dan
Powell, Sophia Landman, [music]
Diane Wong, and Rowan Nemirow and was
engineered by Chris Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it [music] for the daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.